I have a 15-second
delay. Once you then talk about these kinds of
guidelines, management, in effect,
mariculture, aquaculture, pollution control,
work with the oceans, climate and climatology,
then when you're looking at proposals or these
sorts of things that you try to direct research
into,
In our program now, what we do is describe the area,
the general programmatic area that we're
interested in, and then
discuss with the scientific community what kinds
of research ought to be done, and essentially
respond to the community as they consider these
regions or these areas and decide from a
scientific point of view what they think ought to
be done. And what happens is that we finally get a
strong enough signal that a particular
limited part of a program area should be tackled.
Some of the scientists who are going to lead it
stand up and say, look, it's time that we started
working on this question. And then what we go
through is a series of steps. If the area is not well
enough known, and in most cases it's not, then we
sponsor a workshop in which all the experts in that
particular area of research gather and discuss
the status of knowledge and what are the gaps in the
status of knowledge, and do a tentative design on a
research project to fill in some of those gaps.
either at that meeting or shortly thereafter,
either by osmosis or by election or by some
process, a handful of leaders will take the
leadership and say, OK, we're going to organize a
research program. And now we insist that they make
this known to the community by putting an ad in
Science or someplace saying, we're going to
prepare a proposal along these lines of the
National Science Foundation. Anyone who has
interest and good ideas on how this Problems
should be tackled. Send us a letter and give us your
thoughts. If it fits, we'll incorporate it into
the task. And if it doesn't, we'll say so. And if you
don't like our answers, go see the foundation and
tell them that we're giving you a bad time. Good
shape.
Now, a couple of questions now very quickly on you
concerning personal comments, which you may
choose to ignore, by the way. For example, given
the way that the problems you see facing this
country, let's say that in terms of nuclear
energy, with energy being overlapping problems,
what's your attitude towards developing nuclear
energy and nuclear waste? Do you feel it should be
stopped? Should it be continued? Do you feel as if
the oceans can serve as sort of a waste deposit?
That's strange. If you had asked me that two months
ago, I would have said, No problem. Don't worry
about it. But unfortunately, between then and
now, I read this rather excellent book on We Almost
Lost Detroit is the title of it. And it concerns
some accidents that we've already had using fast
breeder reactors and water-cooled reactors. And
my opinion was that we had self-quenching cooling
fluids for use in these reactors. And it was
impossible for them to get out of hand, because if
the neutron flux got too high, why, the material
would just become opaque to neutron flux, and it
would shut down. But apparently, this stuff, the
fusion, the uranium and the thorium don't behave
like they should. And I guess they develop
hotspots within the core. And once the hot spot
develops, it can do some damage to the cooling
system, to the flow of it. And then it ceases to be
cooled correctly, and that hot spot continues to
get hotter. And so now I'm convinced that
probably, unless we can deal effectively with
that, and I don't think we can, that we probably
shouldn't be using fission as a major source of
heat. a power in the future, and it's too bad
because it's so attractive otherwise. I think
they can deal effectively with the waste. That's
not my concern. My concern is that they are going to
have some bad accidents and that those accidents
are going to do a lot of harm to a lot of people. So I'm
not sure it's worth the gamble. Are you optimistic
about the ocean as a producer of food, as an
oceanographer? Oh, I think so. I think
my view is that now we're about the same point that
the
country was in 1860 when
we were hunting buffalo. If we had continued to
improve our ability to hunt buffalo, they would
have disappeared even faster. Instead, we learn
how to farm and to husband cows and to actually feed
them and collect them together, essentially the
farming effort that's going on. And I think once we
stop worrying about improving our ability to
catch fish, start worrying more about how to farm
the seeds, that the seeds can really, you know,
they can, I think the potential for, supplying
proteins is
certainly not unlimited, but it certainly goes
orders of magnitude over above what we're talking
about now in the sustained yield of the oceans in
the natural conditions. Third comment, then, on
these fields you've defined as pressing fields, I
suppose. How successful will we be in mining the
ocean, producing finite resources from the
ocean, at a cost which is within some kind of a
bottom line in terms of cost.
Well, I'm certainly not an expert, but I was
exposed to a rather thorough briefing by
Marquis Sunnyvale, where their manganese nodule
effort and the Glomar Explorer effort were
housed. This was before the explorer went out and
picked up a piece of a submarine. But they went
through the whole exercise for, this was at a COA
meeting out at Stanford, went through the whole
exercise of how they examined, how they decided
whether or not to go into a field like this. And
their first step was to do a complete market study
on on present-day mining, on the grades of ores
that are being used to recover copper and other
minerals, the potential for finding more of
those, the whole market study bit. And they
decided that the
copper concentrations, for example, in
manganese nodules, is now better, higher, around
2%. than the copper concentrations in the ores of
the mines that they're now mining. And therefore,
they said, then it's worth looking into. And then
they identified all the engineering problems
associated with doing that kind of mining. The
first study was a million dollar operation. Then
that engineering study was a $10 million
operation, identifying all the engineering
problems. And they, at that time, were in the third
step, which costs about $100 million. And that is
tackling the remaining engineering problems.
What kind of a nozzle do you use to pull them up? Do
you use airlift or dredge or what? And they felt
that they had essentially solved the major
engineering problems with recovering it from the
ocean.
The fourth step, which had cost a billion dollars,
and that is to actually start mining and
recovering the metals from it and marketing them,
was the one they were about to launch into. And
that's the step at which they felt they had to have
some assurance, either from the federal
government on how the US government was going to
protect their interests at sea, or some
international agreement on how they'd operate at
sea. And, you know, the Japanese are in it, and the
Germans are in it, and the French are in it, and the
U.S. is in it. And I would guess that within no more
than 20 years, maybe 10, we'll be recovering
medals from the bottom of the sea. I think once we
start, it's going to get easier. Yeah, but that
anticipates another question of mine, and that
is, How are you going to use the sea and utilize the
sea? And how is the foundation going to encourage
projects when it becomes fairly apparent with
200-mile boundaries, international
agreements, that oceanographers' activities
will be more and more limited?
Well, I'm not... I think it's going to be more
difficult for us to operate internationally, but
I don't think it's going to be limited. I think we
can work out bilaterals and regional agreements
and international agreements. And I'm not really
pessimistic about being able to do the kind of
research we want to in the future. It's going to
take a little bit more planning. And it may take
some funding to solicit participation by some of
those countries that we don't now do. But I think
I'm pretty optimistic that we'll be able to go
ahead and work.
Good enough. Now, given the problems in fishing
and international cooperation which are
developing and international agreements, do you
see oceanography moving in perhaps closer to the
shores? That is, with more and more demand for
practical oceanography, if I may use that word,
for finding finite mineral resources, and with
fishing banks, after all, close to our shores
itself Will oceanography come back from the sea
rather than go back into deep
water?
I think the expansion will be in the shallow water
areas and in the continental shelf areas, but I
don't see the deep ocean work pulling back from the
deep ocean. because of that i think the ratio will
change but it won't be because deepwater people
have moved into shallow water you know there isn't
that much going on in deepwater
the onr and the
nsf are the only ones that support deepwater work
and all the other agencies work primarily in
shallow water so i you know there will there will be
a shift in the percentage but it won't be because
the deepwater people pulled out of the sea. If you
were, in the 20 odd years you've been involved in
oceanography, what do you consider the tools
which have changed the nature of work in
oceanography the greatest?
Well,
let's see, I would say
Satellite navigation.
STDs.
You know, the Neil Brown type STD.
XPTs.
Curb meter developments.
And the whole raft of geophysical tools.
Seismic reflection, multichannel seismic
reflection. But even before that, even single
channel seismic reflection and refraction.
The auto analyzer, which wasn't developed or
oceanographers, but was adopted by them for
measurements of nutrients and chemicals aboard
ship in large numbers and accurately.
And taking the ship, taking the computer to sea.
Almost everyone says the computer to sea
someplace. Just imagine where they list it.
Instant analyzing of data. There have been glory
fields of oceanography, if I may again use that
term. That is, oceanography essentially began
with marine biologists. Then physical
oceanographers seemed to come into sway. And for a
while, people involved in nuclear physics. What
do you think will be the next glory field of
oceanography? You're going to advise us on what
hard science to study to become an oceanographer.
What would you suggest?
Oh, that's a tough one.
It would either be chemical or physical
oceanography.
And I guess it would be physics for the next few
years.
And if you were going to advise an academic
department on what sort of oceanographer to try to
turn out, what would you suggest?
I would say physics and chemistry.
Now, while you were involved both in your own
research and as a member of a funding agency, what
program did you feel to be the most successful, and
what program did you feel to be the most disastrous
fate?
Depends on what you mean, project? Project,
right, or a project that was to lead to a series of
projects, either
way. Well, I think I had a strong hand at ONR for a
number of years in developing deep-sea
telemetering buoys. And I thought that's going to
be absolutely necessary. It's the wave of the
future. We'd better get it developed and get to
using it.
And I thought I had done everything right. I had set
up a committee of scientists to advise on the
development of this hardware all the way along so
that when it was ready, we could just hand it to them
and they'd take it away and use it, and the whole
bit. And in the end, it turned out that the tool was
so expensive and so unreliable, even after
putting $10 or $12 million in it, whatever it was,
that it just wasn't suitable as an oceanographic
tool. And I consider that to be pretty much of a
disaster for which I had a great deal of
responsibility, if not the whole
responsibility. And I feel bad about it. I just had
no idea of how much the things would cost in the end
or how difficult it would be to develop a system
that you could put in the ocean and leave for a year.
without having something go wrong with some piece
of it that would essentially inactivate the whole
thing. And we spent a lot of money using space
technology on it, the whole industrial weight of
general dynamics, and failure modes, and
reliability. And you get all through, you still
don't have a workable tool. And you don't have one
that
that the community can afford to buy very many of
them. And so now I've given up developing systems
for oceanographers. When they come in and say, we
want this system for this research task, then
we'll try and get the system for them. But I've
given up trying to anticipate what I think they're
going to need.
That's probably one of the biggest failures. The
most successful program that I've been
associated, had anything to do with, and I haven't
had too much to do with, is the Climap program. And
this is the, it's an IDOE project. Essentially
it's a project which the paleontologists who
study fossil fuel, fossil in the deep sea
sediments, try to say something about the age of
the sediments or when the conditions changed by
looking at these fossils in the deep sea core. And
up until we supported the Climap program, each
paleontologist was very excited about his own
work. And he would show you micro photographs of
forams until you could, you know, you were sick of
them. But there wasn't any, outside of telling
you, outside of telling the oil companies
whether, what geologic age, was being examined in
the cores. It didn't tell you an awful lot. But the
scientists at Brown, John Embry, at Lamont, Jim
Hayes,
at Oregon State University, Ted Moore, put
together a program with about 25 to 30
paleontologists. And they welded them into a team
so that they had
each one working on the same core, each one
obtaining a different bit of evidence on that
core, so that when you put all this evidence
together and did some statistical manipulation
with it, you could say what the ocean temperature
was at that time, at that place, at the surface. And
they developed a map of the Ice Age Ocean 18,000
years ago. They induced the global atmospheric
modelers to use that data, that picture of the
global ocean, to examine their own models and the
constants that the modelers were using. Just a
very, very successful program.
If you were to suggest, as a matter of fact, To young
oceanographers,
what sort of an education should they receive?
That is, hard science, schools of oceanography.
What direction should schools of oceanography
take them? What would you suggest? Should they get
a general oceanography degree, or should they
major in a hard science like you did? Should
oceanography be only graduate study, or should it
be undergraduate study?
Well, I think there's
There's no question in my mind that you need a
thorough grounding in whatever
basic science you're going to operate in before
you come into oceanography, because
oceanography is just the application of that
science to the oceans. So if you get an
undergraduate degree in oceanography, you don't
have any strength in any particular field, not
physics, not mathematics, or anything else, and
you really end up more at a technician role than you
do at a researcher role. And some of the most
successful people have gone on and got their PhDs
in the hard science, in chemistry or in physics,
and then come into oceanography as a matter of
interest. And in fact, that's where they all came
from initially. And that's still where many of the
good ones come from. But oceanography is
training. their own experts now, very
successfully, they can compete with. Monk came in
that way, and Stommel came in that way. All of the
older group of people, it's the only way they could
get in, as a matter of fact. But I would certainly, I
think,
if you want to say I'd like to work in the field at the
technical level, at the technician level, then
you get an undergraduate degree. But if you really
want to do research, your own research, an
advanced way forward, you really have to have an
undergraduate degree in a basic science. Which
oceanographer possibly had the greatest
influence on directing your career? On my career?
Your career.
Well, you know, not from a professional point of
view, but from...
And I guess that's not the question. The question
is from a professional point of view. I take it from
any point of view. Well, you know, obviously
Maxwell taught me in the coming into the field, and
he coerced me into going to Washington, so he had a
profound impact on my career. As far as...
professional end of it, I suppose Ted Folsom, who I
worked with closely for about six years before I
joined ONR, probably had the most,
the largest impact. Have you had any regrets that
you chose to become a, may I use the word, political
oceanographer rather than an academic
oceanographer? No, no, I don't, I'm not a,
particularly strong research type. And I faced
that
shortly after I came to ONR. I decided I surely had a
better management capability than I had a
research capability. And so it was not really
difficult for me to make the decision. And I
certainly never regret it.
Are you going to say a few words about where you
think the focus of research will be? Yeah, by that I
don't mean in physics or in chemistry. What I
really am referring to is the annual decision or
the annual approach by Congress to put all of
oceanography into one super
agency.
In this country today and
since the early 60s, the real oceanographic
strength of this country has been at the academic
institutions, at the universities. And I think
this is the reason that the country leads the world
in oceanography, because of the academic
atmosphere. and the impact of the students on
their professors in tackling various problems
and in keeping them sharpened up. And so I get
concerned when we talk about giving
responsibility for supporting research to an
agency with an in-house capability. And I'm going
to do whatever I can to make sure at the basic
research component, the research component of
the country stays that the university is
supported through grants and contracts from
whatever source, and that that pot of money is
protected very carefully by the federal
government, from inroads, by in-house
laboratories. And I have a strong conviction from
my days at ONR and watching the Air Force turn the
responsibility for their basic research in
geophysics over to the geophysics research
directorate, which was a laboratory up in
Massachusetts, and then watching their contract
research program disappear. It's very easy to
say, well, I need a million dollars because I've
got a laboratory with a whole bunch of civil
servants in it. And therefore, we just take it away
from the contract research program. this year,
give it back next year. And, you know, just this
continual encroachment of in-house versus
contract research. It's kind of insidious. Now,
by in-house... I mean in-house Navy labs, NOAA
laboratories, EPA laboratories. I think these
are necessary for carefully applied research and
to answer questions that these... that these
agencies need for their own mission. But I get
concerned that, for example, in the Sea Grant
Program, which is in NOAA, that they might have
difficulty protecting that from other parts of
NOAA, because it's a grant. a grant program.
Universities are violently opposed to this idea
of a super agency to administer funds. This is one
of the common things that oceanographers talk
about. So you think the fear may well be from
competition with in-house agencies? Oh, I don't
know whether that's their fear or not. I think
they'd like to have more than one place to go to. All
right, now that's what I said. Their words always,
what I always hear is we'd like to have several
agencies to try our ideas out on because an agency
tends to favor certain kinds of ideas and become
sort of locked into those ideas. Yeah, I think
it's, I think their concerns are
valid ones. And in fact, the foundation, the whole
foundation's policy is to encourage other
agencies to support basic research. But when you
start talking about an agency
or an office which will be responsible for all of
oceanography or all of environmental sciences,
or in the case of energy, all of energy, you have to
be very careful about how you set it up.
particularly with regard to the basic social
research component that's just a holly horse
right around well i'm interested in that i want to
ask more questions about that